3. CNN Architecture for MNIST Digit
One of the important things in developing a CNN accelerator for FPGA is the number of parameters it has.
The parameters I am referring to are the weights and biases.
The number of parameters matters because FPGAs typically have a limited amount of memory.
This is a resource table that compares several zinc FPGA boards.
If you look at the amount of block memory available, it falls within the range of several megabytes.
So you need to consider this when designing a CNN accelerator.
In addition to the block memory, FPGA boards usually also have DDR memory.
However, using DDR memory can be more complicated than using block memory.
You need to consider which parts of the weights need to be loaded from DDR memory into block memory, and when this should happen.
If it is not properly designed, it may affect the performance of the accelerator.
If you search on Google using the keyword CNN model for mNIST digit GitHub, you'll find a lot of results.
As an FPGA engineer, your job is to choose the one that best suits your needs.
For example, this repository contains many models with varying numbers of parameters ranging from around 6000 to around 1000.
Another thing to consider is the type of layers used in the architecture.
For example, this model has around 6000 parameters and only uses convolutional layers, max pooling, batch normalization, and dense fully connected layers.
Meanwhile, the model with around 1000 parameters uses more types of layers, including separable convolution and dropout.
This matters because when you're designing a system for an FPGA using pure HDL such as Verilog or VHDL.
It can be a tedious and time consuming task.
A model with more parameters might use fewer types of layers, which can result in less work when designing the corresponding HDL modules.
As long as the number of parameters fits within the FPGAs memory and the accuracy meets the requirements, there is no need to complicate the design.
In this course, we will be using a CNN model with fewer than 1000 parameters.
Of course, in terms of accuracy, it doesn't reach 99%, but it does exceed 90%, which I believe is sufficient for learning purposes.
This is the CNN architecture that we will use in this course.
It uses two convolution layers, two max pooling layers, and one fully connected layer.
The first convolutional layer has an input size of 28 by 28 by one, which corresponds to the size of the mNIST digit images.
It then uses five by five by three filters with a stride of one.
Therefore, the output feature map has dimensions 24 by 24 by three.
We can also say that this convolution has one channel of input feature map and three channels of output feature map.
After the convolution, we add the bias.
This bias is added to every element of each channel.
Therefore, in total we have three bias values, one for each output channel.
The next step is to apply the ReLU activation to each channel.
After that, we move to the first max pooling layer, which downsamples the feature map from 24 by 24 by 3 to 12 by 12 by three.
The second convolutional layer has an input size of 12 by 12 by three.
It uses five by five by three filters for each channel, with a stride of one.
Since we have three input channels in total, we have five by five by nine filters.
Here is how the output feature maps are calculated.
The first output feature map is the result of the three input channels convolved with the kernels, and the results are added together.
The same process is also applied to obtain the second and third output. Feature maps.
Therefore, the final output shape is eight by eight by three.
After the convolution, we also add the bias and apply the ReLU activation.
The second max pooling layer downsamples the feature map from eight by eight by 3 to 4 by four by three.
Next we have a flatten layer which reshapes the 2D feature map into a 1D vector.
The flatten layer reshapes the feature map from 4x4 by 3 to 48 by one.
Finally, the fully connected layer has 48 neurons in its hidden layer and ten neurons in the output layer.
Now we can calculate the number of trainable parameters in this network.
First, in the first convolutional layer we have five by five by three for the kernel and one by three for the bias.
Next, in the second convolutional layer, we have five by five by nine for the kernel and one by three for the bias.
Next, in the fully connected layer we have 48 by ten for the weights and one by ten for the bias.
If we sum all of these, we get a total of 796 parameters.
All of these parameters will be trained during the training process.
The result of training is that it achieves 96% accuracy on the mNIST digit data set.