4. CNN Model for MNIST Digit
In this lecture, I will walk you through the code for the CNN model that will be used in our accelerator.
The model I am using comes from this reference.
It uses the Python programming language and the PyTorch library.
However, this is not a course on CNNs or machine learning model development, so I assume you already have a basic familiarity with these topics.
First, open the Jupyter Notebook, then import the necessary libraries.
Make sure that the required libraries are already installed, otherwise you will encounter an error.
Next, this code is used to download the mNIST dataset from an online source and store it in the folder named data.
Both the training set and the test set will be downloaded.
Next, this code will divide the dataset into batches defined by the batch size, both for the training and test sets.
Next, we create a CNN class.
In the initialization method, we create the CNN layers based on the architecture.
The first convolutional layer has one input channel, three output channels, and a kernel size of five by five.
The second convolutional layer has three input channels, three output channels, and a kernel size of five by five.
The max pooling layer has a two by two kernel size.
The fully connected layer has 48 input units and ten output units.
We also create several NumPy arrays filled with zeros.
These arrays are used for debugging purposes.
Next we define the forward method.
In this method, we process the input through the first convolutional layer, followed by ReLU activation and max pooling.
The same steps are applied to the second convolutional layer convolution, ReLU and max pooling.
After that, we flatten the output and pass it through the fully connected layer.
Next, we can print the model and check how many parameters it has.
It has 796 parameters, which is the same as we calculated before.
Next we define the stochastic gradient descent optimizer with a learning rate of 0.01 and a momentum of 0.5.
After that, we define a function to train the CNN model.
This represents a typical training loop in PyTorch, which includes several important steps.
Performing a feed forward pass.
Calculating the loss.
Performing back propagation and updating the model parameters using an optimizer.
Next, we define a function to evaluate the model's performance on a test dataset.
Finally, we create a loop with ten epochs.
An epoch means one complete pass of the entire training dataset through the neural network during the training process.
Inside this loop, we call the train and test functions.
Next, we run the training process and wait for it to complete.
The final result shows that the model achieves 96% accuracy.
At this point, we have obtained the trained weight and bias values.
Once the model is trained, we can save it so that we can simply load it later without retraining.
Next, we can try testing the model with a bitmap image.
First, load a bitmap image, convert it to a numpy array and display it using pyplot.
Next, we convert the image to a format supported by the model.
The grayscale values are converted from the 0 to 255 range to the 0 to 1 range.
Finally, we pass the image to the model.
We can change the input image by modifying the file name in the path.
Now that we have the model, the next step is to design the RTL module.
Before that, we need to extract the weight and bias values from the model we just trained and convert them into a suitable format.
The PyTorch model uses 32 bit floating point numbers for the weight and bias values, but in FPGA, integer or fixed point numbers are commonly used due to their efficiency.
In this accelerator, we are going to use eight bit numbers to represent the weight and bias.
This process of converting floating point weights and activations into integers with lower precision to make models more efficient for hardware implementations is known as quantization.
The quantization process starts with scaling.
Scaling is done by multiplying by a factor to map the values into an integer range.
In our case, we multiply it by a factor of 128.
Why?
Because in a signed eight bit integer, one bit is used for the sign indicating whether the value is positive or negative.
So we only have seven bits or two to the power of seven to represent the magnitude.
Next we need to convert the number to two's complement representation.
Finally, we print them to a file as text in hexadecimal format.
Later this file can be read by the RTL modules.
We do the same process for the first convolutional, second convolutional and fully connected layers.
So in our project folder we will have 16 memory files that contain weights and biases.