7. The RTL Module of Max Pooling and ReLU
The output of the convolution in layer one is a 24 by 24 feature map, which corresponds to 576 values in a stream.
This stream becomes the input to the max pooling and ReLU module.
We can think of these 576 pixels as being arranged into 24 rows from row one to row 24.
In our model, we use a two by two max pooling operation, for example, to compute one pooled value.
We take elements one and two from the first row, and elements one and two from the second row.
Then calculate the maximum among them.
Then we compare the maximum value with zero.
If it is greater than zero.
We keep the value, otherwise we replace it with zero.
This is the ReLU operation.
To implement this functionality in RTL, we can use a line buffer that stores only one by 12 elements.
This corresponds to a single row of the output from the max pooling and ReLU layer, which has a size of 12 by 12.
Here is how the buffer works.
A comparison operation checks the input values within every two by two patch.
We use indexing to access these values.
If the current value is larger than the value previously stored in the buffer, we replace the stored value with the current one.
Otherwise we do nothing.
This process ensures that in the end we retain the maximum value.
Finally, we compare it to zero to perform the ReLU operation.
The final output is a 12 by 12 feature map or 144 values in a stream.
Here is the Verilog implementation of the max pooling and ReLU module.
First we define the input and output streams.
We have three of each because the feature map has three channels.
Next we define the buffers.
We have three buffers, each with one times 12 elements.
Then we define pointers and flags for accessing the line buffers.
Here is how we write the input.
The first element of the two by two window is written directly to the buffer.
The second and third inputs are compared with the previously stored values and only written if they are greater.
The fourth input is also compared with the current maximum value, and the result is then compared with a zero to perform the ReLU operation.
This is the simulation output of the max pooling and ReLU calculation.
The input consists of 24 by 24 data values, with the input valid signal indicating when the input is valid.
The result of the max pooling and ReLU operation is a 12 by 12 feature map.
We have three channels of these feature maps and the output is indicated by the output valid signal.