12. Functional and Performance Testing
In the previous lecture, we learned about the Zynq system used for the CNN accelerator.
In this lecture, we will test the system using the PYNQ framework.
Before we begin, make sure that the bitstream file and the two accompanying files required to program the PYNQ overlay have been uploaded to your FPGA.
What we are going to do here is read a bitmap file, convert it into an array of pixel data, and use AXI DMA to send it to our accelerator.
From the Jupyter Notebook on your board, start by importing the necessary libraries and programming the FPGA using the overlay.
Then, create the DMA object, followed by allocating the input and output buffers for the DMA transfer.
After that, import the additional libraries needed to read a bitmap image from a file.
Next, load and display the image, make sure it has been uploaded to the appropriate location on your FPGA board.
Once the image is loaded, copy the pixel data into the DMA input buffer to prepare it for processing by the accelerator.
Then, initiate the DMA transfer in both directions, sending the input and receiving the output.
Finally, display the prediction result.
You can try using a different bitmap file to ensure the system is functionally correct.
Now that we are confident in the functionality, we can proceed to performance testing.
We will compare the computation time between the hardware accelerator and a software implementation running on the Zynq ARM processor.
Here's the setup.
First, we will load the model for software based computation, run the prediction, and measure the time required to complete the process.
Then, we will program the overlay, run the prediction on the hardware accelerator, and again, measure the time taken to complete the computation.
From the Jupyter Notebook on your board, start by importing the necessary libraries for software based computation.
You may need to install the torch library first by connecting your board to the internet and installing it using pip.
Next, define the CNN class using the same structure as the one used during model training.
Then, load the model weights from the corresponding file, ensure this file has already been uploaded to your FPGA.
After setting up the model, follow the same process to make a prediction using the CNN running on the Zynq ARM processor.
At this point, import the time library and measure the computation time for the software based CNN inference.
Next, to measure the hardware computation time, we follow the same process as before.
Program the bitstream using the overlay and run the prediction.
We use the time library to measure the duration of the DMA transfer and the computation.
By timing the complete DMA operation, we also capture the computation time of our CNN accelerator.
To measure the speed up factor, we divide the hardware computation time by the software computation time.
Computation time may vary depending on the board and the Linux OS scheduling on the Zynq ARM processor.